Good evening to you. This short
lived cold snap is on its way out
now. It looks like milder air will
move in tomorrow, but it will be
moisture laden. There will be a lot
of cloud and outbreaks of rain
spreading from west to east during
the day. Tonight is going to be
cold, central, southern and eastern
parts of England and eastern
Scotland will be cold. There may be
frost and ice from the day’s
moisture. Further
moisture. Furtherwest
frost and ice from the day’s
moisture. Further west the cloud
will be building, outbreaks of rain
pushing on, temperatures here will
be recovering and the winds picking
“P
up as well. You can see the blue
up as well. You ran see the blue
colour is just
up as well. You can see the blue
colour is just hanging on for dear
life across the far east for a while
life across the far east for a whila
through the
life across the far east for a while
through the morning, then the orange
and yellow starts to take over as
the cloud and rain is built—in. It
the cloud and rain is built-in. It
could be bright
the cloud and rain is built—in. It
could be bright for a short while in
could be bright for a short whila in
the morning
could be bright for a short while in
the morning across the Southeast,
cold as well, but the rain will
start to push its way eastwards.
Some heavy bursts for western
Scotland but generally speaking it’s
mainly light and patchy. Turning a
bit dry out West later in the day.
The winds will be picking up
particularly for the north west of
Scotland and it’s here where we will
see the mildest of the air, 12—13
see the mildest of the air, 12-13
for
see the mildest of the air, 12—13
for Belfast and west Scotland. Still
chilly in the east. In the weekend
it stays mild on Saturday certainly,
but very windy in the north and this
new cold front sinks southwards
bringing a bound of showers pushing
to southern parts by Sunday and
cooler for all.
coolerforall. It’s
to southern parts by Sunday and
cooler for all. It’s cloudy and mild
on Saturday for England
From the mind—bogglingly complex...
I’m culturally overwhelmed.
..to the elegantly straightforward.
Now we’ve been through it all,
we can tell you what growing up
in the 21st century is really like.
I like an optimist.
They are the stuff of dreams,
aren’t they?
These are the culmination
of brilliant brains,
working in cutting—edge
science and design.
Anybody could cover this.
A unique partnership
with limitless opportunities.
The BBC and The Open University —
bringing learning to life.
# I’ve been wanting you
# For so long
# It’s a shame...
# But I’ve got no time
# To play your silly games...
# Silly games! #
Whoo!
Welcome to Question Time. On
tonight’s panel, James Cleverly,
tonight’s panel, james Cleverty,
former
tonight’s panel, James Cleverly,
former chair of the Conservative
Party during last year’s election,
now a minister at the Foreign
Office, Labour
Office, Labourshadow
now a minister at the Foreign
Office, Labour shadow secretary for
international trade. She was Shadow
Foreign Secretary under
Foreign Secretary underJeremy
Foreign Secretary under jeremy
Corbyn and
Foreign Secretary underJeremy
Corbyn and a candidate in the
contest to become leader of the
Party.
party, Emily Thornberry. A former
investment banker and MP since 2015,
currently leader of the SNP at
Westminster, Ian Blackford. Fraser
Nelson, a journalist whose career
began on the Times and the Scotsman.
Since 2009, he has been editor of
the right—leaning Spectator. And the
the right-leaning Spectator. And the
bishop
the right—leaning Spectator. And the
bishop October, previously chapter
in bishop October, previously
chaplain to the House of Commons and
the first black woman to become a
bishop, Rose Hudson—Wilkin. Welcome
bishop, Rose Hudson-Wilkin. Welcome
to my guest in
bishop, Rose Hudson—Wilkin. Welcome
to my guest in the studio Philip
Fraser, welcome to you down the
line, and welcome to our virtual
audience from Windsor. Thank you for
joining us. Talking to you at home
for top you ran
for top you canjoin in
joining us. Talking to you at home
for top you can join in the
conversation in the usual way on
social media at BBC Question Time.
Let’s take our
Let’s take ourfirst
social media at BBC Question Time.
Let’s take our first question
tonight, which is from Mike Unger.
with the
With the release of the findings
related to Priti Patel’s reported
billing of
billing of civil servants, if she is
found to have broken the ministerial
code, should she go? A story which
broke earlier this evening. Emily.
broke eartier this evening. Emily.
What
what we
broke earlier this evening. Emily.
What we have heard is that Boris
what we have heard is that Boris
johnson is
What we have heard is that Boris
Johnson is basically
Johnson is basicallyjust going to
johnson is basically just going to
give her a rap
Johnson is basicallyjust going to
give her a rap over the knuckles. I
think we need to see the report. The
allocations that I have heard our
lyric, to say
lyrics, to say the least. I think
lyric, to say the least. I think
it’s an
lyrics, to say the least. I think
it’s an extreme example of billing
in the workplace, and I think people
in the workplace, and I think peopla
should be
in the workplace, and I think people
should be measured by the same
measure, so, if Priti Patel had been
a senior civil servant, how would
she have been treated? I think we
should treat a minister in the same
way, and I think it is a serious
lapse of
lapse ofjudgment by the Prime
Minister to simply rap over the
knuckles. We don’t yet know that is
what he is going to do. That’s what
I heard. If he doesn’t, that’s
fine... Cue do you think Priti Patel
should lose her
should lose herjob? of step one, we
should lose her job? of step one, we
should see
should lose herjob? of step one, we
should see the full report and get
her to come to Parliament and answer
her to come to Partiament and answer
on her
her to come to Parliament and answer
on her behaviour. From what one
hears, this is very serious and the
government is not taking it
sufficiently seriously. These
allegations were made in February.
In a resignation statement by the
most senior civil servant in the
Home Office, Sir Philip Rutnam, who
was suing for unfair dismissal, he’s
talked about allegations of shouting
and swearing, belittling people,
and swearing, belittling peopla,
making
and swearing, belittling people,
making unreasonable demands,
behaviour creating fear, and it
needed some bravery to pull out.
This is what he accuses Home
Secretary Priti Patel of doing. She
has a was denied it. There is a
report on BBC Newsnight tonight and
other places saying that the draft
report suggests that evidence of
bullying has been found by Priti
Patel. James. Well, I haven’t seen
Patel. james. Well, I haven’t seen
the report, and I
Patel. James. Well, I haven’t seen
the report, and I am incredibly
uncomfortable speculating about the
content of a report that I haven’t
seen or pontificating about what
seen or pontifirating about what
actions
seen or pontificating about what
actions might be taken from that. I
know Priti Patel very well. She is a
neighbouring MP of mine, and I have
known her long before either she or
I became MPs. And I think that my
observation of her is that she has
always expected and demanded that
people work hard, and I think that
peopla work hard, and I think that
that is a
people work hard, and I think that
that is a completely legitimate
attitude to take into government.
The Home Office particularly as the
The Home Office particularty as the
department
The Home Office particularly as the
department that keeps us safe. It
has to deal with some incredibly
important and sensitive issues, and
that does mean that people need to
be decisive, people need to be
hard—working, and it is the
hard—working, and it is thejob
be decisive, people need to be
hard—working, and it is the job of
hard-working, and it is the job of
ministers
hard—working, and it is the job of
ministers to make sure departments
function at their optimal output.
Not by bullying people. You don’t
Not by bullying peopla. You don’t
get optimal
Not by bullying people. You don’t
get optimal output by bullying
peopla,
people, do you? Edge I took across
peopla, do you? Edge I took across
them,
people, do you? Edge I took across
them, perhaps? You don’t do it by
billing peopla,
billing people, do you know that. If
billing peopla, do you know that. If
she has
billing people, do you know that. If
she has been bullying people, don’t
you think she should go? As I say,
I’m not going to speculate on a
report I haven’t read. There seems
to be some suggestion that this,
that, if she was bullying, it was
not intentional, and therefore that
might make it less of a problem.
might make it lass of a problem.
Does
might make it less of a problem.
Does that hold water? Well, I don’t
want to sound like a broken record,
you are asking me to spectate on a
report that I haven’t seen. On what
is an important and sensitive issue,
and that is why I am uncomfortable
doing so, but it is the
doing so, but it is thejob of
ministers to make sure that
departments deliver. Chemical I
don’t think anyone is doubting that.
It’s just the way one goes about it.
These departments are delivering for
the British people, and it is a
minister’s
minister’sjob to make
the British people, and it is a
minister’s job to make sure they do
so. There is never any excuse for
not treating people with respect,
but then again ministers do need to
demand pretty high standards on
behalf of the voters, who sent them
into office. In the Home Office
especially, there will be lots of
very difficult conversations. The
big question is where you draw the
line between a difficult
conversation in saying this isn’t
good enough, I expect you to do
better, if that’s what she did, and
bullying. It’s pretty difficult to
know that because we have no idea
what is in the report. The leak of
it, as far as we know, says that she
broke some protocol but not
necessarily broke the ministerial
code. We will have to wait to see.
If it was a major breach of the
ministerial code, you can expert her
ministerial code, you ran expert her
to go in Boris
ministerial code, you can expert her
to go in BorisJohnson’s next
reshuffle. From the start of this,
reshufﬂe. From the start of this,
there
reshuffle. From the start of this,
there have been lots of
contradictory reports about what she
did and didn’t do, whether she was
simply demanding that her department
live up to the expectations that
voters set or whether she did go
over the line. I guess it won’t be
long before we find out. Lets hear
what you have got to say. Marina. It
is Anti-Bullying
is Anti—Bullying Week and we are
is Anti-Bullying Week and we are
trying to
is Anti—Bullying Week and we are
trying to educate leadership to our
children to reduce bullying, so it’s
really disappointing to hear
really disappointing to hearJames
really disappointing to hear james
issue
really disappointing to hearJames
issue that assertive behaviour that
strays into billing is acceptable in
any leadership position for them
they should be zero tolerance of
they should be zero tolarance of
this
they should be zero tolerance of
this behaviour. In fairness, I don’t
think you were saying... We haven’t
seen the report and I think it is
deeply unfair, starting to pass
judgment on somebody who takes the
protection of our nation and the
peopla
people within it incredibly
seriously. Caroline. I
seriously. Caroline. Ijust echo
what Marina says, and absolutely I
agree with James, this is all
speculation, but if the report does
say that she has been displaying
bullying behaviour, absolutely I
think she should go. She is in such
a senior position and, as Marina
said, she is a senior person and
this is not a role model we want.
this is not a rola model we want.
You ran
this is not a role model we want.
You can have a decisive,
industrious, hard working without it
being bullying. This is a question
to the whole panel, but specifically
james. If
James. If there were allegations of
james. If there were allegations of
bullying that
James. If there were allegations of
bullying that you found in your
staff, what would you do about it
personally I am just going to go a
bit further, if I made. Ruth.
bit further, ifI made. Ruth.
Listening to
bit further, if I made. Ruth.
Listening to James, I think what
Listening to james, I think what
happened to
Listening to James, I think what
happened to being innocent until
proven guilty, given that nobody has
had sight of this report it stop not
only has nobody seen this report but
Priti Patel is strongly denied she
had bullied anybody for the let’s
deal with the principles of this
because, in the last Parliament,
because, in the last Partiament,
Theresa May
because, in the last Parliament,
Theresa May brought all party
leaders together to make sure that
Parliament was taking its
responsibilities over bullying and
sexual misconduct, and we have to
[ad by
lead by example. We have to show
leadership and we have to make it
very dear
very clear that those that work in
Partiament,
Parliament, those that work
elsewhere in society needs the
fullest protection from this kind of
thing. And I think there has to be a
certain amount of honour in all of
us in making sure that we discharge
our response abilities in the right
way. We can’t take judgment
ourselves tonight on Priti Patel
because we haven’t seen the report,
and I think Emily is right, this
report should be published. I think
it is in the public interest that it
is. If it is the case that there is
is. If it is the rase that there is
a serious
is. If it is the case that there is
a serious breach of the ministerial
code, there ought to be consequences
but, I have to say, if that is the
use, what
case, what should happen in the
rase, what should happen in the
first
case, what should happen in the
first instance is that anybody who
is guilty of a serious breach of the
ministerial code should not wait to
be sacked, they should take their
responsibility and they should
resign, because that is the way we
used to do things in public life in
this country, that is the kind of
standard we should be held to.
Interesting from your perspective,
given that you were chaplain at
Westminster. I’ve only
Westminster. I’ve onlyjust heard
Westminster. I’ve only just heard
about this, I
Westminster. I’ve onlyjust heard
about this, I think I would want to
see the report and to hear what is
being said, she is being accused of,
and also what the report itself has
thrown up, and for due process to
take place. I believe passionately
that bullying of any form is
unacceptable, and so we must wait.
Let’s not be rushed to make a
Let’s not be mshed to make a
judgment at
Let’s not be rushed to make a
judgment at this time. Let’s wait
and see and hope that due process
will be followed. I am going
will be followed. I am going to take
another question but, first, we are
looking for people to join our
looking for peopla to join our
virtual
looking for people to join our
virtual audience,
virtualaudience, like
looking for people to join our
virtual audience, like everybody
joining us from Windsor tonight.
Next week, we will be in Swansea and
the week after that in Bath so, if
you live in either of those places
or thereabouts, get in touch at the
website. You can fill in the online
website. You ran fill in the online
form. It
website. You can fill in the online
form. It would be great to see you
ﬂip let’s take a
flip let’s take a second question,
ﬂip let’s take a second question,
which is
flip let’s take a second question,
which is from Elliot Williams.
Should the government
Should the governmentjust allow
families to meet up over the
Christmas holidays if people are
Christmas holidays if peopla are
going to be
Christmas holidays if people are
going to be breaking the rules
going to be breaking the mles
anyway,
going to be breaking the rules
anyway, what is it a case of
anyway, what is it a case ofjust
anyway, what is it a use ofjust
some peopla
anyway, what is it a case ofjust
some people spoiling it for the rest
some peopla spoiling it for the rest
of us just eat a
some people spoiling it for the rest
of us just eat a few sprouts? I love
sprouts, actually the top do you
think, Elliott? I
think, Elliott? Ican
sprouts, actually the top do you
think, Elliott? I can very much
think, Elliott? I ran very much
empathise
think, Elliott? I can very much
empathise with people like myself,
empathise with peopla like myself,
who
empathise with people like myself,
who have family members with a lot
of peopla, a lot
of people, a lot of elderly people,
of peopla, a lot of elderty peopla,
and I really
of people, a lot of elderly people,
and I really want to see them all
year round, and I really want to see
them all year round next year as
well, so if there is any chance of
me getting these vulnerable people
any ill, we don’t want to be doing
that but, if you are going to break
the mles, I’m
the rules, I’m not going to lie, I
the mles, I’m not going to lie, I
am tempted. I
the rules, I’m not going to lie, I
am tempted. I want to come up from
our audience, a show of hands. I’m
not sure I’m going to be able to
answer this question! Who is
answer this question! who is
thinking
answer this question! Who is
thinking they might
thinking they mightjust have to get
the family wrote a Christmas, come
what may? 0h,
what may? Oh, come on! You are all
favouring about it. That’s
interesting. Rose, I’m going to ask
7°“-
you, because of your
interesting. Rose, I’m going to ask
you, because of yourjob, and
Christmas is a critical time of year
for those that follow the Christian
tradition in this country, but this
year, should people accept perhaps
they can’t be together? It’s quite
possible because of the pandemic
that we will not be able to
celebrate Christmas in the way we
have always celebrated it. I think
have always celabrated it. I think
we
have always celebrated it. I think
we shouldn’t be waiting for
government to make laws about this.
I think we, as a community, should
act responsibly. What does that
act responsibly. what does that
mean, not
act responsibly. What does that
mean, not having grandpa Auchrannie
over? It means we need to behave in
a way that is going to protect those
who are most vulnerable. My family
are scattered all over the country
and I would desperately love to have
my wonderful, gorgeous grandchildren
with me, but it might not happen,
and I think we need to be patient
and accept our reality for what it
is and make sure that we protect
those who are most vulnerable. Right
now, in Swale and Thanet, the
infection rate is over 600 and 500.
That is exceptionally high. In the
church, we have worked with
government to ensure that protection
of those most vulnerable. We have
also worked to ensure that our
churches are Covid safe, we are not
gathering in large groups, and it’s
not just about the church. There
notjust about the church. There are
not just about the church. There are
those who
notjust about the church. There are
those who are interfaith brothers
and sisters. Eid, a big festival,
Diwali, and I don’t know what will
happen with Hannukah, so we are in
it together. Let’s just be patient
and let’s do the right thing. Let’s
hear from our
hearfrom our audience.
and let’s do the right thing. Let’s
hear from our audience. John.
hearfrom ouraudience. John. I
hear from our audience. john. I
totally agree
hearfrom ouraudience. John. I
totally agree with Rose, thank you
for saying that. A lot of local
businesses have put so much
investment into becoming Covid safe,
just to have that whipped away at
the last moment, just before
Christmas, just getting some money
back. I
back. lam hearing
Christmas, just getting some money
back. I am hearing that,
back. lam hearing that, if
Christmas, just getting some money
back. I am hearing that, if we have
back. lam hearing that, ifwe have
these five days
back. I am hearing that, if we have
these five days around Christmas,
there are going to be 25 days of
lockdown in January for the where
lockdown inJanuary for the where is
lockdown in january for the where is
the logic in
lockdown inJanuary for the where is
the logic in that? I don’t
understand it. I
understand it. Iwant
the logic in that? I don’t
understand it. I want to know how we
help the business that have invested
so much money into making sure their
businesses are safe, and to Rose’s
point, it is down to personal
responsibility for the why do we
need Boris Johnson
need BorisJohnson to tell us how we
need Boris johnson to tell us how we
should
need BorisJohnson to tell us how we
should live our daily life? It’s
down to us as individuals. To
protect ourselves and others. There
are many of us who, around Eid,
could not get together with loved
ones. We made it work and used Zoom
and other facilities.
and otherfacilities. You have to
and other facilities. You have to
make it
and otherfacilities. You have to
make it work and be sensible. Thank
Martin. Would it not be more
appropriate for people to meet in
their own homes rather than meeting
“P
up in large supermarkets purchasing
nonessential goods? Right, 0K
nonessential goods? Right, OKfirst
nonessential goods? Right, 0K first
“P
up nobody
nonessential goods? Right, OKfirst
up nobody should be going to
supermarkets either put up Elliott,
should the government allow people
to meet up over Christmas if people
to meet up over Christmas if peopla
are going
to meet up over Christmas if people
are going break the rules anyway
because of nature of hands, quite a
few people are thinking, well, I am
few peopla are thinking, well, I am
just going to
few people are thinking, well, I am
just going to get my family over
whatever. That has to be part of the
compilation for the government,
doesn’t it?
I’v
e
I’ve been really impressed, not so
much surprised, but really impressed
by how, for the most part, people
by how, for the most part, peopla
have
by how, for the most part, people
have been careful and thoughtful and
have taken
have ta ken really
have been careful and thoughtful and
have taken really sensible
precautions. It is really sad when
important religious festivals have
been so heavily disrupted. We’ve
been so heavily dismpted. We’ve
already
been so heavily disrupted. We’ve
already mentioned Eid, Easter, holy
week for. . .
week for... We know all that, James,
week for... We know all that, james,
but what ran you
week for... We know all that, James,
but what can you tell us about what
but what ran you tell us about what
will happen?
but what can you tell us about what
will happen? The guidelines we have
put forward have always been guided
by the science and there has always
been a balancing act. 50 this idea
been a balancing act. So this idea
that five days
been a balancing act. 50 this idea
that five days of getting together
at Christmas might lead to a month
of lockdown? I know there’s a lot of
speculation about what might be
announced and obviously the Prime
Minister will let us know what the
guideline changes might be, but our
response to coronavirus has not been
dictated by events in the diary,
it’s been dictated by the
epidemiology. But hang on, Boris
johnson has
Johnson has referred to Christmas
johnson has referred to Christmas
many times
Johnson has referred to Christmas
many times and we know it is
important and it’s something he is
factoring into decision and has
dearty
clearly talked about that he knows
dearty talked about that he knows
everyone
clearly talked about that he knows
everyone wants to be together for
Christmas. Yes, but the guidelines,
and we don’t know what they are and
we will be guided by the science,
because people want to get together,
not just
notjust people of the Christian
not just peopla of the Christian
faith, but
notjust people of the Christian
faith, but Christmas is
traditionally a time of people of
traditionally a time of peopla of
all
traditionally a time of people of
all faiths or none to get together,
and that emotional safety net is
actually really important.
Throughout the government response
to the pandemic, it’s about being
able to or trying as best as we can
able to or trying as best as we ran
to balance
able to or trying as best as we can
to balance the public health,
people’s personal health, the
economic health, the emotional and
psychological health of the country,
and none of these things are easy
and they are all finely balanced and
the whole world is having to learn
the whola world is having to learn
on
the whole world is having to learn
on the job,
the whola world is having to learn
on the job, but
the whole world is having to learn
on the job, but we do want, as long
as it ran be
as it can be done safely, people to
as it ran be done safely, peopla to
enjoy
as it ran be done safely, people to
enjoy each
as it can be done safely, people to
enjoy each other’s company at a
really
really important part of the year.
Ian? This is a terrible time for
everybody and as politicians, we
should thank the public for the way
that peopla
that people have behaved. The fact
that peopla have behaved. The fact
that peopla
that people have behaved. The fact
that people have had to make
sacrifices for so long, the fact
that peopla
that people have lost loved ones and
that peopla have lost loved ones and
have not
that people have lost loved ones and
have not been able to grieve in the
right way. We know there is some
hope with the vaccine, although it
will take time to roll this out and
we have to be careful about managing
expectations as we go through this.
What are the expectations for people
what are the expectations for people
in
What are the expectations for people
in Scotland in terms of getting
together at Christmas? Is it likely
to happen? One thing I will say is
that the four governments will work
together over this because we need
to make sure that there are
opportunities where it is
appropriate for people to travel.
appropriate for peopla to travel.
Does
appropriate for people to travel.
Does that mean we won’t see Nicola
Sturgeon making an announcement
before the UK Government? That has
happened fairly frequently through
happened fairty frequently through
the
happened fairly frequently through
the pandemic. I am not saying
critically, I’m
critically, I’mjust
the pandemic. I am not saying
critically, I’m just saying it’s a
fact and are you saying she won’t do
that on this occasion? We obviously
have responsibility for health in
Scotland on the First Minister makes
announcements at the daily press
briefings in front of Parliament and
briefings in front of Partiament and
we are
briefings in front of Parliament and
we are dictated by that timetable
we are dictated by that timetabla
and I
we are dictated by that timetable
and I hope people respect the
decisions taken, the announcements
have been done in good faith given
the responsibility is because of the
epidemiology that
epidemiology thatJames has
the responsibility is because of the
epidemiology that James has talked
epidemiology that james has talked
about.
epidemiology that James has talked
about. But we are in a situation
where we took earlier action in
Scotland to tighten things in
September and we are beginning to
see some encouraging signs. It is
earty, but
early, but there are encouraging
earty, but there are encouraging
signs that
early, but there are encouraging
signs that the numbers are
declining. All of us want to give
peopla hope
people hope and we have to think
peopla hope and we have to think
about asking
people hope and we have to think
about asking people to observe the
mles
rules and it’s important we do that,
mles and it’s important we do that,
but we
rules and it’s important we do that,
but we have to think about those who
have been on their own for a long
time, those that are vulnerable, the
mental health pressures we see. If
we ran
we can find a way to give people a
we ran find a way to give people a
little bit
we can find a way to give people a
little bit of hope that they can
little bit of hope that they ran
have
little bit of hope that they can
have some kind of family time, I
have some kind offamily time, I
would
have some kind of family time, I
would ask people that they follow
would ask peopla that they follow
exactly the
would ask people that they follow
exactly the regulations put in
place. I
place. lam
exactly the regulations put in
place. I am like rows, we have a big
place. lam like rows, we have a big
family and I’ve
place. I am like rows, we have a big
family and I’ve not seen my
granddaughter except for once this
year and we have to make sacrifices.
Life is on hold and we have to find
a way to get through this safely
without increasing the risk of an
increase in the infection as we come
through the winter period. In our
audience, Tom. There are people who
aren’t obeying the rules, they are
aren’t obeying the mles, they are
absolutely a
aren’t obeying the rules, they are
absolutely a disgrace to the nation.
I don’t want to be thanked. You
shouldn’t be thanking anyone. The
peopla who
people who are obeying the rules, we
people who are obeying the mles, we
know
people who are obeying the rules, we
know what we are doing, but it’s the
peopla who are
people who are not obeying the rules
peopla who are not obeying the mles
are
people who are not obeying the mles
are the
people who are not obeying the rules
are the problem and as you are
sitting there, all two metres apart,
you ran see it is
you can see it is possible to obey
you ran see it is possibla to obey
the mles
you can see it is possible to obey
the rules and have a conversation
the mles and have a conversation
and have
the rules and have a conversation
and have some sort of social
gathering. And that is the same for
everybody else. You’ve just got to
obey the rules. It’s not
complicated. Dave? All
complicated. Dave? Alll
obey the rules. It’s not
complicated. Dave? All I would say
is that we should stay at home as
much as we can and I have family all
much as we ran and I have family all
around the
much as we can and I have family all
around the country who I can’t see,
but the one thing is that through
the last ten months we have been
told we are being guided by the
science but that doesn’t seem to be
the rase in
the case in all
science but that doesn’t seem to be
the case in alljudgments we are
the use in all judgments we are
making. I’m
the case in alljudgments we are
making. I’mjust wondering
making. I’m just wondering at what
point in the next few months before
the vaccine comes out that we will
be guided by the science all the
time. Marina? It sounds to me like
there will be some loosening of the
restrictions around Christmas
because of Christmas, and I
because of Christmas, and Ijust
hope that the people who make up the
mles will
rules will think about such things
mles will think about such things
as
rules will think about such things
as definitions of essential versus
nonessential in the context of
Christmas. For example, I
Christmas. For example, Ican
nonessential in the context of
Christmas. For example, I can go to
Christmas. For example, I ran go to
my [oral
Christmas. For example, I can go to
my local supermarket and buy
Christmas gifts and toys but my
[oral toy
local toy shop is closed and that is
[oral toy shop is closed and that is
a time
local toy shop is closed and that is
a time that is so critical to them
and there are so many examples of
that. I
that. Ijust hope that people are a
that. Ijust hope that peopla are a
bit more
that. Ijust hope that people are a
bit more sensible about their
definition of these rules. Fraser,
definition of these mles. Fraser,
the question
definition of these rules. Fraser,
the question is, should the
government allow people to meet up
over Christmas if people are going
over Christmas if peopla are going
to break
over Christmas if people are going
to break the rules anyway? It’s
to break the mles anyway? It’s
funny, the
to break the rules anyway? It’s
funny, the government should be
trusting people a bit more. I don’t
believe that people behaved
recklessly and I think the public
have been incredibly restrained for
all of this year, and I think the
“Y
way the government is framing it is
a bit strange, saying you will have
five days where it is a free for all
and you ran see
and you can see who you want but
and you ran see who you want but
after that
and you can see who you want but
after that the shutters will come
down. The government isn’t
suggesting that, there is
speculation they may and James is
speculation they may and james is
not told
speculation they may and James is
not told us what will happen and
that’s a bit frustrating but I see
the position. But the government
hasn’t told us that. That is
speculation. This is the speculation
that the five days we will be
released, to use the words the
health advisers are using, released
for five days and then 25 days of
lockdown to compensate which is what
we heard yesterday. It doesn’t seem
to make a lot of sense to me,
because if they phrase it that way,
it’s almost an encouragement for
people to go out and travel while
peopla to go out and travel whila
they ran and
people to go out and travel while
they can and in that way you might
they ran and in that way you might
end up being
they can and in that way you might
end up being counter—productive
end up being counter-productive
where
end up being counter—productive
where people are travelling when
where peopla are travelling when
they might
where people are travelling when
they might have stayed at home and
thought that this is the Christmas
where they won’t see my family, so I
will see them at Easter or in
Febmary,
February, and if the government were
Febmary, and if the government were
to give people a
February, and if the government were
to give people a bit more
discretion, it all depends, for
example, how bad the viruses at your
example, how bad the vimses at your
level. If you
example, how bad the viruses at your
level. If you leave in a place where
it is bad for Covid, you wouldn’t
want to go to a place that didn’t
have much, but if you are in one of
the parts of the country where there
is not much Covid and you want to
visit a relative there, that’s
different. I think people can be
different. I think peopla ran be
tmsted
different. I think people can be
trusted to make their own judgments
tmsted to make their own judgments
here. The
trusted to make their own judgments
here. The history of this year has
shown it and it is pretty strange to
think that the government is sitting
there working out which days of the
year we should be allowed to see our
family or not. I’m sure there is a
more common—sense way of doing this.
more common-sense way of doing this.
The Americans,
more common—sense way of doing this.
The Americans, for example, have
been advised not to see each other
for Thanksgiving. That’s quite a big
deal, it’s a big festival over
there, but when Canada had the same
thing, the virus did spike in
Canada, so you can see that there
Canada, so you ran see that there
are pretty good
Canada, so you can see that there
are pretty good reasons. The
government wants to urge restraint
and say we know you want to see your
family that the virus levels are far
too high in December to allow that
and people would respond to that, so
and peopla would respond to that, so
it all
and people would respond to that, so
it all depends how things are
looking at the end of next month,
and I think people can be looked ——
and I think peopla ran be looked --
tmsted to
and I think people can be looked ——
trusted to make responsible
decisions. Five days versus 25,
Emily, was something that came from
Pub“:
Public Health England. What would
Public Health England. what would
the
Public Health England. What would
the Labour Party do? Would you stop
the labour Party do? Would you stop
peopla
people seeing
the Labour Party do? Would you stop
people seeing each other at
Christmas or allow a bit of free for
all? I’m not going to say, and I am
not going to say that this is easy
and different people will give you
different answers as to what a
successful Christmas is. Somebody
like me, I would say seeing my
family and I would want to see that
more than anything else and that
would be a successful Christmas.
Rose might put more religion
emphasis on this on the opportunity
to praise God together but other
people might say as someone has
already, that we need a healthy bank
balance coming out of Christmas
because we absolutely depend on
Christmas portrayed, and frankly,
teenagers might be thinking, never
mind the family, it’s an opportunity
for us to have a party, so lots of
forustohavea party, solotsof
peopla have
for us to have a party, so lots of
people have different expectations
and even my definition of family,
and even my definition offamily,
who is family
and even my definition of family,
who is family and who is not family?
There are people who don’t
necessarily have family who spend
time with a family but would they be
allowed to spend time at Christmas
with us? And if the deal is you can
with us? And if the deal is you ran
spend five days
with us? And if the deal is you can
spend five days with another family
or you rannot
or you cannot spend five days with
the family because you are not
strictly family but you have to be
locked down for 25 days after, you
ran see
can see how these things are not
ran see how these things are not
easy. But one
can see how these things are not
easy. But one thing we have to be
clear about is that the way we get
through this is by having a pact
between the people and government,
and I think the British people,
and I think the British peopla,
actually,
and I think the British people,
actually, have shown for the last
year that they are responsible, that
they know what they have to do
because they are looking after each
other and they know that they are as
responsible as the most
irresponsible person. We are all in
irresponsibla person. We are all in
this
irresponsible person. We are all in
this together, but they need to have
leadership, clear leadership from
leadership, dear leadership from
the
leadership, clear leadership from
the government with a clear plan
the government with a dear plan
which is
the government with a clear plan
which is properly articulated, that
which is property articulated, that
peopla know
which is properly articulated, that
people know what is expected of them
and in that way, if we can be shown
and in that way, if we ran be shown
the way through,
and in that way, if we can be shown
the way through, then I think that
peopla will
people will fall into line because
peopla will fall into line because
in
people will fall into line because
in the end, British people want to
in the end, British peopla want to
do
in the end, British people want to
do the right thing. We may not have
a proper Christmas this year but we
sure as hell ought to have one next
year and that is what we should work
towards. I want to move on, but you
wanted to cut in. We just need to
accept that for this year, Christmas
is not going to be as it has always
been, and frankly, whatever happens,
Christmas is not going to be
cancelled because Christmas is not
ancellad because Christmas is not
about
cancelled because Christmas is not
about the pandemic, Christmas is
about love, the love we show to
peopla and in
people and in particular to those
peopla and in particular to those
most
people and in particular to those
most vulnerable in our communities.
Let’s take another question from
Richard.
Richard. Will Boris’s remark
increase the chances of Scotland
breaking away from the UK and has
Devolution been a disaster question
at Boris
at BorisJohnson is reported having
at Boris johnson is reported having
said
at BorisJohnson is reported having
said that devolution had been a in
Scotland. Ian, not
Scotland. Ian, nota
said that devolution had been a in
Scotland. Ian, not a view you might
concur with,
concurwith, but
Scotland. Ian, not a view you might
concur with, but has his remarks
increase the chance of Scotland
breaking away from the UK? What
breaking away from the UK? what
you’ve seen in
breaking away from the UK? What
you’ve seen in the course of the
last few months is a consistency in
the polls that has shown a majority
for independence and over the piece,
that has been increasing. I think
what Boris Johnson
what BorisJohnson has shown by his
what Boris johnson has shown by his
remarks
what BorisJohnson has shown by his
remarks is disrespect to the people
of Scotland and a disrespect for
devolution and I have to say that it
is someone who simply doesn’t
understand modern day Scotland.
Scotland has changed tremendously
over the course of the last 21
years. The clarification from 10
Downing Street is that Boris
Downing Street is that BorisJohnson
Downing Street is that Boris johnson
doesn’t
Downing Street is that BorisJohnson
doesn’t have a problem with
devolution, but he has a problem
with you, the SNP. He has said what
he has said and tried to roll
he has said and tried to rollback,
he has said and tried to roll back,
but the
he has said and tried to rollback,
but the fact is the SNP has won
every election to the Scottish
parliament since 2007 and are way
partiament since 2007 and are way
ahead in
parliament since 2007 and are way
ahead in the polls and there is
massive public satisfaction with the
“Y
way the government and the First
Minister in particular are dealing
with the pandemic. I look over what
we have done over the course of the
last 20 years, not having tuition
fees, the fact we have free personal
rare, the fact
care, the fact we have world leading
rare, the fact we have world leading
climate change
care, the fact we have world leading
climate change legislation. There’s
climate change lagislation. There’s
an awful
climate change legislation. There’s
an awful lot to be proud of and I
think that what this crisis has
shown and what Brexit has shown is
that there are limitations on our
Parliament and increasingly people
Partiament and increasingly peopla
are making
Parliament and increasingly people
are making that
are making thatjudgment that it is
are making that judgment that it is
time to
are making thatjudgment that it is
time to finish the journey. The real
question out of this and the
attitude of Boris
attitude of BorisJohnson has shown
attitude of Boris johnson has shown
in the way
attitude of BorisJohnson has shown
in the way that he has said it does
not really matter if people vote for
the SNP, and of course we fought the
last election on the right of
Scotland to choose. This election is
Scotland to choose. This elaction is
going to be
Scotland to choose. This election is
going to be about Scotland’s right
to choose and if we win that
election, it has to be absolutely
clear that if democracy will
prevail, as we talked about
democracy and other parts of the
world recently, in the US, that the
peopla of
people of Scotland are the ones that
peopla of Scotland are the ones that
have
people of Scotland are the ones that
have the right to determine their
own future. We desperately want to
find a way back into Europe and it
is right, as parliamentarians, as
is right, as partiamentarians, as
Democrats,
is right, as parliamentarians, as
Democrats, all of us should
recognise the right of the people of
Scotland to have their say in a
referendum. Fraser, the question is,
has Devolution been a disaster and
will Boris Johnson’s
will BorisJohnson’s remarks
increase the chance of Scotland
becoming independent?
ii
It was a daft remark, especially for
the lead of a party has many people
the lead of a party has many peopla
standing for
the lead of a party has many people
standing for the devolved parliament
standing for the devolved partiament
next year.
standing for the devolved parliament
next year. That said, I have some
sympathy with the overall sentiment.
I thought devolution would be very
different to what it turned out as.
I remember at the time thinking, and
I’m sure Scotland has world—class
I’m sure Scotland has world-class
climate
I’m sure Scotland has world—class
climate legislation but it also has
climate lagislation but it also has
some
climate legislation but it also has
some of the worst poverty and
deprivation in western Europe. Life
expectancy in some parts of Glasgow
is lass
is less than it is in Rwanda, and
is lass than it is in Rwanda, and
it’s shocking to
is less than it is in Rwanda, and
it’s shocking to stop always thought
hack
back then that was because, if there
was a Scottish Parliament, there
was a Scottish Partiament, there
would
was a Scottish Parliament, there
would be a lot more focus on
inequality and poverty and a lot
more intellectual resource piled
into making this problem better. And
that instead we have seen horrible
9’P5-
gaps. really.
that instead we have seen horrible
gaps, really, between attainment
between the rich and the poor in
Scottish schools, Nicola Sturgeon
has to be judged
has to bejudged on
Scottish schools, Nicola Sturgeon
has to be judged on that and it’s
not getting much better. Rather than
the energy going into making things
better for the people of Scotland,
going into talking instead about the
constitution, about an independence
referendum, about having another
fight with Westminster. It’s pretty
difficult to blame Westminster for
things that are entirely in the
control of the Scottish Parliament.
control of the Scottish Partiament.
It’s only in the
control of the Scottish Parliament.
It’s only in the last year we have
had some responsibility for social
security. We have been praised by
the UN for our approach to poverty,
introducing eight different
measures, four of them entirely new,
for example, what we have done in
terms of the £10 allowance for young
people, to drive them out of
peopla, to drive them out of
poverty.
people, to drive them out of
poverty, and life expectancy in
Scotland has increased over the
lifetime of the parliament. There
lifetime of the partiament. There
has
lifetime of the parliament. There
has been a greater increase in
London, but the increase in life
expectancy in Scotland has been
higher than it has elsewhere in the
UK, so what you are saying is a
gross distortion of the truth. If
you look at the number of young
peopla going
people going to university, young
peopla going to university, young
peopla in
people going to university, young
people in Glasgow, what we have done
peopla in Glasgow, what we have done
with the
people in Glasgow, what we have done
with the attainment fund, there is
an improvement in the attainment of
young people coming from the most
deprived areas. You mentioned
university but, if you are from a
deprived background in Scotland, you
are almost half as likely to get
into university as you are from a
similar background in England. That
is an absolute scandal, and that is
exactly the sort of thing devolution
was supposed to address, but those
9’P5
gaps are still there. It pains me to
see.
see. This can’t just
see. This can’tjust be a
conversation between you and I am
sorry about that. Devolution, under
Tony Blair, was supposed to sort out
the problams,
the problems, as he saw it, the SNP
and keep Scotland together as part
of the union. It’s not been a
success, has it? I
success, has it? Ithink
of the union. It’s not been a
success, has it? I think actually
devolution was about making sure
that power got closer to people so
that power got closer to peopla so
that
that power got closer to people so
that there was more accountability
and better decisions were made. Yes,
but politically Tony Blair was
hoping that it would dampen down any
fire for independence had to keep
Scotland to the union. I think
devolution has not gone far enough,
I think we can devolve more power.
I think we ran devolve more power.
You have
I think we can devolve more power.
You have seen it from Andy Burnham,
how much he wants to have more power
and authority in places like
Manchester. In the Highlands and
islands of Scotland, they feel they
are a long way from Edinburgh and
they feel they are not given
sufficient power over their own
destiny. What was great to hear was
destiny. what was great to hear was
to hear peopla
destiny. What was great to hear was
to hear people actually talking
to hear peopla actually talking
about
to hear people actually talking
about issues in relation to
Scotland, because I think too often
it boils down to, you know,
constantly talking about
constitutional issues, when there
are major problems. May I say one
are major problams. May I say one
thing in Nicola
are major problems. May I say one
thing in Nicola Sturgeon’s defence,
and you never thought you would hear
me say that, but when you are
saying, Nicola Sturgeon, she is
making all those announcements on
Covid... Chemical I was pointing it
out as a fact. The reason she was
doing it was that, quite often, a
number of these things were about
school terms and university terms
and, because you go back to school
faster in Scotland, they needed to
make decisions about what to happen
with youngsters, so therefore
decisions had to be made and,
frankly, if they had waited for the
UK Government to make the decision,
in would already have started.
That’s an example of devolution in
action and doing things for the
better. Let’s focus on people’s
lives, because that is what it’s all
about. We have two Mike Richards, so
I have to you by your initials.
Richard E. Good evening. Devolution
has been a roaring success. In
Windsor, we are keen on the localism
agenda and we are trying to
introduce a town council because
believe local people should be in
charge of local decisions. It’s a
charge of [oral decisions. It’s a
very simple
charge of local decisions. It’s a
very simple message. The problem I
have is that I remember the
devolution campaign back in 96—97,
devolution campaign back in 96-97,
and one
devolution campaign back in 96—97,
and one of the main criticisms was
that it would be used by the
nationalists as a vehicle for
nationalists as a vehida for
launching
nationalists as a vehicle for
launching their own independence
ambitions and, 20 years on, we are
seeing the opportunism of the likes
of Nicole Sturgeon, who have taken
of Nicola Sturgeon, who have taken
advantage of the situation and are
pushing an agenda which is far
beyond what the devolution campaign
originally intended to achieve.
Heather. I wanted to know are the
SNP going to push for a referendum
next year or are you going to focus
on re—election first? Let me get
on re-elaction first? Let me get
round
on re-election first? Let me get
round the
on re—election first? Let me get
round the panel for
round the panel forJames, coming
round the panel for james, coming
back to
round the panel forJames, coming
back to the question, has devolution
been a disaster? Will Boris’s remark
been a disaster? will Boris’s remark
increase
been a disaster? Will Boris’s remark
increase the chance of Scotland
breaking away from the UK? When you
breaking away from the UK? when you
heard reports
breaking away from the UK? When you
heard reports of this comment from
the Prime Minister, were you
thinking, oh, no, what did you say
that for? Boris is a big fan of
devolution, I know that from
discussing it with him. How can he
discussing it with him. How ran he
be a fan
discussing it with him. How can he
be a fan and think it is a disaster?
They seem richly exclusive. I know
this is the case because I worked
this is the rase because I worked
with him
this is the case because I worked
with him in devolved government. He
is a passionate fan of devolution
and he understands the weight
devolved government works best is
when there is that devolved
administration, that devolved
government has both power but also
responsibility. If you don’t mind me
saying, it seems a strange defence
of his comment... To say that he
said one thing but actually he means
the opposite. So...
the opposite. 50... Santa it’s hard
the opposite. So... Santa it’s hard
to believe
the opposite. 50... Santa it’s hard
to believe both things at the same
time. The Prime Minister’s
experience as leader of a devolved
administration, where he called for
administration, where he rallad for
more
administration, where he called for
more devolution for the city he ran
as mayor but also more broadly, is
evidence it is a fan of devolution.
The real irony is there is only one
party in Westminster who is trying
to scrap devolved government for
Scotland, and that’s the SNP. All
the rest of us agree that devolved
government is a really good model.
The SNP are the ones trying to scrap
devolved government. Fraser is
absolutely right, Ian will debate
this constitutional stuff day in,
day out, because every minute we are
debating that we are not debating
the catastrophic budget deficit in
Scotland, the collapse of
educational standards in Scotland,
the appalling... We don’t have a
budget deficit. The appalling health
outcomes, the abysmal administration
of the NHS in Scotland, the sick
kids hospital with problems, the
Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Glasgow,
sill problems there, some of the
most appalling drug—related deaths
most appalling duly-related deaths
in Europe.
most appalling drug—related deaths
in Europe. Some pockets of poverty
which would make other parts of the
world shocked. Do you think the
Prime Minister but comments will
increase the chance... That’s the
question for the increase the chance
of Scotland taking away? What I am
of Scotland taking away? what I am
not going to
of Scotland taking away? What I am
not going to do is to play into
Ian’s game. I am asking you to
answer the question put by the
audience, will Boris
audience, will BorisJohnson’s
audience, will Boris johnson’s
remark
audience, will BorisJohnson’s
remark increase the chance of
Scotland breaking away from the UK?
I don’t think so. My point is, every
minute we debate the issues Ian
would like us to debate, which are
these constitutional separatist
issues, we are not debating the
things that government are meant to
be held accountable for, which is
be held accountabla for, which is
protection of
be held accountable for, which is
protection of the people, good
stewardship of the economy, how they
deal with health and, on all those
metric, the
metrics, the SNP has been a disaster
metric, the SNP has been a disaster
for the
metrics, the SNP has been a disaster
for the Scottish people. I lived in
for the Scottish peopla. I lived in
Scotland, I
for the Scottish people. I lived in
Scotland, I love Scotland and the
Scots, and the SNP government has
provided a very poor political
service for the Scots. To be fair,
there are things you pointed out
that our terribly wrong in Scotland,
but if you go around England, there
will be places with pockets of
deprivation and all those things,
schools that are having huge
stmgglas
struggles in terms of how they
educate their children in those
communities, so
communities, sol
educate their children in those
communities, so I am not quite sure
we ran
we can throw that at the SNP. How
communities, so I am not quite sure
we can throw that at the SNP. Howl
we ran throw that at the SNP. How I
would like
we can throw that at the SNP. Howl
would like to approach this is to
say, think of a family. When you
say, think of a family. when you
think of a
say, think of a family. When you
think of a family, you have your
teenagers, your but in teenagers who
just on the brink of adulthood, and
they are desperately wanting to be
independent and free and do their
own thing, and I think that we are a
mature democracy and we have got to
find a way of enabling the family,
because that’s what we are in the
United Kingdom, 3 family, to
United Kingdom, a family, to
ﬂourish,
United Kingdom, 3 family, to
flourish, to fly and flourish. So I
ﬂourish, to ﬂy and ﬂourish. So I
hope it
flourish, to fly and flourish. So I
hope it doesn’t actually increase
the chances of a kind of breaking
away that says we are no longer
family again. I actually personally
love the idea of the United Kingdom.
I love the idea of the one world,
and I want to see people around the
and I want to see peopla around the
world
and I want to see people around the
world flourishing. We have got to
world ﬂourishing. We have got to
find a way
world flourishing. We have got to
find a way not to have political
domination but enabling, respecting,
in a democratic society. We have to
respect that part of the family that
says, actually, I want to do it in
this way. I will still be part of
the family, and we have got to find
“75
ways of accommodating that. Let’s
take a question from Martin McMahon
stop following the EHRC report
stating Labour had broken the law
stating labour had broken the law
and jeremy
stating Labour had broken the law
and Jeremy Corbyn’s recently in
and jeremy Corbyn’s recently in
Scotland,
and Jeremy Corbyn’s recently in
Scotland, has
Scotland, hasjust been
and Jeremy Corbyn’s recently in
Scotland, has just been restored
Scotland, hasjust been restored in
Scotland, has just been restored in
the
Scotland, hasjust been restored in
the Labour Party by Keir Starmer or
undermined? ——
undermined? ——Jeremy
the Labour Party by Keir Starmer or
undermined? —— Jeremy Corbyn’s
undermined? -- jeremy Corbyn’s
recent
undermined? —— Jeremy Corbyn’s
recent reinstatement. I was shocked
by the events of the last few days.
We were told, initially, we were
told that Keir Starmer had made the
decision to suspend Jeremy Corbyn,
decision to suspend jeremy Corbyn,
and it
decision to suspend Jeremy Corbyn,
and it turned out he hadn’t made the
decision, and then it seemed the
decision was made around him to
reinstate, so he was talking tough
but there seem to be real gaps
between the rhetoric and the
performance. Going into the last
general election, I had friends of
mine, jewish
mine, Jewish friends of mine express
mine, jewish friends of mine express
genuine fear
mine, Jewish friends of mine express
genuine fear about a Labour
government, and I had hoped that the
change in leadership would have seen
the problems of anti—Semitism, which
the problams of anti-Semitism, which
had
the problems of anti-Semitism, which
had seemingly
the problems of anti—Semitism, which
had seemingly crept into many, many
parts of the Labour Party, dealt
parts of the labour Party, dealt
with, and it
with, and it seems that, you know,
Keir Starmer, and I have no doubt
that his intentions are noble, but
he is displaying weakness on this
issue. He needs to make it
absolutely clear that there is no
place in the Labour Party or,
place in the labour Party or,
indeed, to
place in the Labour Party or,
indeed, to politics at all for
anti—Semitism and he needs to act in
anti-Semitism and he needs to act in
accordance
anti—Semitism and he needs to act in
accordance with those words and, at
the moment, and actions don’t align.
Contemporary do you mean there
should be no place in the Labour
should be no place in the labour
Party for
should be no place in the Labour
Party forJeremy Corbyn? I think the
Party for jeremy Corbyn? I think the
original
Party forJeremy Corbyn? I think the
original decision was right. I think
the report was damning. I think
jeremy
Jeremy Corbyn’s response was
jeremy Corbyn’s response was
shocking,
Jeremy Corbyn’s response was
shocking, shockingly inappropriate.
I felt very uncomfortable that there
were so many members of the Labour
were so many members of the labour
Party who could
were so many members of the Labour
Party who could see exactly what the
rest of us could see and yet were
trying very, very hard to make him
Prime Minister of the UK in December
of last year and, as I say, I hope
Keir Starmer at the opportunity to
draw a line under it, and he has
failed.
failad. (“an I
draw a line under it, and he has
failed. Can I begin, as I think any
failad. (“an I begin, as I think any
senior
failed. Can I begin, as I think any
senior member of the Labour Party
senior member of the labour Party
ought to, with
senior member of the Labour Party
ought to, with something personal?
when I began
When I began to first see the cancer
when I began to first see the cancer
of
When I began to first see the cancer
of anti—Semitism growing and
of anti-Semitism growing and
becoming
of anti—Semitism growing and
becoming more apparent in the Labour
becoming more apparent in the labour
Party, |
Party, Ithought
becoming more apparent in the labour
Party, Ithoughtl
becoming more apparent in the Labour
Party, I thought I was doing the
right things. I was calling it out
in Shadow Cabinet, I was speaking to
the leadership, I was speaking out
in public, I put it in a large part
of my conference speech, and I
thought I was doing all that I
could. And then I saw the EHRC
report, and I was profoundly
ashamed. I was profoundly ashamed
that this had happened and, even
though I thought that I had done all
I could in the circumstances, I
dearty
clearly should have done more. I am
dearty should have done more. I am
not sure
clearly should have done more. I am
not sure what I should, but there
was due
was clue more that could have been
was due more that could have been
done, and I
was clue more that could have been
done, and I think that anybody
responsible in the leadership of the
labour Party
Labour Party should have the same
labour Party should have the same
reaction.
Labour Party should have the same
reaction. When you say you are not
reaction. when you say you are not
sure how you
reaction. When you say you are not
sure how you could do more, do you
mean that promoting Jeremy Corbyn as
mean that promoting jeremy Corbyn as
the next
mean that promoting Jeremy Corbyn as
the next leader of this country, you
were one of those people? Let me
answer the first bit and then I will
answer the next bit. What I was
answer the next bit. what I was
saying that I
answer the next bit. What I was
saying that I think my feelings of
contrition, and my feelings that we
had to adopt everything that the
EHRC was saying was absolutely the
right reaction, and it was the
reaction of Keir Starmer, and I was
very disappointed that
very disappointed thatJeremy didn’t
very disappointed that jeremy didn’t
seem to
very disappointed thatJeremy didn’t
seem to have the same reaction. I am
not going to make comments about
disciplinary processes because, in
the end, it is right the EHRC said
it should be done at arms length and
it should be done at arms langth and
it would
it should be done at arms length and
it would be right for me to make
direct comments in relation to that.
But that is how we have got to where
we are. Now, what I write to promote
jeremy and to try
Jeremy and to try to get him into
jeremy and to try to get him into
Number
Jeremy and to try to get him into
Number Ten? Absolutely,
NumberTen? Absolutely, I
Jeremy and to try to get him into
Number Ten? Absolutely, Iwas
because, I tell you this, I
because, Itell you this, I have
because, I tell you this, I have
known jeremy
because, Itell you this, I have
known Jeremy for
knownJeremy for a
because, Itell you this, I have
known Jeremy for a long time,
knownJeremy for a long time, more
known jeremy for a long time, more
than 15 years. He
knownJeremy for a long time, more
than 15 years. He is a neighbouring
constituency MP to me and I believe,
if he had been Prime Minister, he
would have been radical, he would
have been profoundly kind and
profoundly principled. He had
shortcomings and one of the
shortcomings, in my view, and I have
said this before, that he allowed
his own personal feelings,
his own personalfeelings, whereby
his own personal feelings, whereby
he felt
his own personalfeelings, whereby
he felt he was personally under
attack on the issue of
anti—Semitism, so he wasn’t able to
anti-Semitism, so he wasn’t able to
step back and
anti—Semitism, so he wasn’t able to
step back and take an objective view
of it and make the proper decisions,
and that was a profound weakness and
it’s something that he knows, that’s
what I think, because I told him.
You know him better than anybody
else in this room, so do you think
he will apologise for what the EHRC
called the failures of leadership in
railed the failures of leadership in
addressing
called the failures of leadership in
addressing anti—Semitism? Well, I
addressing anti-Semitism? Well, I
don’t
addressing anti—Semitism? Well, I
don’t know. I don’t think it’s right
for me to speculate. I certainly
hope he does, and I certainly hope
he takes the opportunity to think
through why we are where we are and
what it is that I personally think
you should do. But, you know, we
need to move on. We need to own this
problem, find a solution and we must
problam, find a solution and we must
move on.
problem, find a solution and we must
move on. The country needs an
opposition that is ready to step
into government because, frankly, we
ran do
can do without this lot. That is
ran do without this lot. That is
absolutely
can do without this lot. That is
absolutely shocking. How much
evidence do you need? He spent
decades associating with 9/11 truth
is and Holocaust deniers on the idea
that this was too hard to see and
that even with the evidence
prevented by the report, you are
still here saying you do not regret
trying to install him as Prime
Minister of this country. It is
genuinely shocking. Jeremy Corbyn
genuinely shocking. jeremy Corbyn
has spent
genuinely shocking. Jeremy Corbyn
has spent his life fighting racism
in this country. He demonstrably
hasn’t. And that is what he has
done. As I say, I have been not
trying to score points, I have been,
in my view, as honest and open as I
possibly ran be
possibly can be on this very
difficult issue, and I hope people
difficult issue, and I hope peopla
hear
difficult issue, and I hope people
hear what it is that I’m saying.
Richard? I’m completely shocked and
when Keir Starmer came to power, I
when Keir Starmer fame to power, I
thought he
when Keir Starmer came to power, I
thought he would be dealing with
jeremy
Jeremy Corbyn better and he
jeremy Corbyn better and he
encouraged
Jeremy Corbyn better and he
encouraged me very much when I saw
what he did at the beginning and he
gave jeremy
gavejeremy Corbyn
what he did at the beginning and he
gave Jeremy Corbyn the
gaveJeremy Corbyn the opportunity
gave jeremy Corbyn the opportunity
to apologise
gavejeremy Corbyn the opportunity
to apologise and he
gaveJeremy Corbyn the opportunity
to apologise and he never did, and I
just cannot believe that this man
could have rose to a position of
almost being a
almost being 3 Prime Minister of our
almost being a Prime Minister of our
country, and I’m
almost being 3 Prime Minister of our
country, and I’m really shocked in
the way of his attitude and
behaviour and he can’t apologise for
the things he has done. It is
shocking. My father survived the
Holocaust, he is 98 years old, and
what he went through and everything
that happened is unbelievable and I
am shocked that he is back in the
party-
party. He should be nowhere near any
position of any power. I am really,
really upset about the way that has
been dealt with and I think it
should be much stronger than what
has happened. I
has happened. Ijust wanted to say
that with anti—Semitism. And
that with anti-Semitism. And
everything
that with anti—Semitism. And
everything around it and Jeremy
everything around it and jeremy
Corbyn
everything around it and Jeremy
Corbyn being there throughout this,
there are loads of other prejudices
going on and it is becoming
systemic. I think going forward, we
need to know how to deal with these
issues and leave the past where it
is and make sure these things are
not done going forward, so what
steps are being taken to ensure
incidents and actions such as this
are not going on going forward? We
will get round the rest of the panel
if I may.
ifI may. Fraser?
will get round the rest of the panel
if I may. Fraser? I have to say I
think Keir Starmer has been pretty
decisive over this. He has not
allowed Jeremy Corbyn comeback as a
allowed jeremy Corbyn comeback as a
labour
allowed Jeremy Corbyn comeback as a
Labour MP and he does not have the
labour MP and he does not have the
whip restored
Labour MP and he does not have the
whip restored and Keir Starmer is
facing pressure from his party
saying they will resign if
saying they will resign ifJeremy
saying they will resign if jeremy
Corbyn
saying they will resign ifJeremy
Corbyn doesn’t get the whip and he’s
not moving an inch, so here’s an
instance where I am no natural
labour supporter but I’ve been
pretty impressed at the way Keir
Starmer has followed through on what
he has said. He really wants to
demonstrate, and needs to
demonstrate, that the Labour Party
demonstrate, that the labour Party
is, in his
demonstrate, that the Labour Party
is, in his words, under new
management and I’m not sure you can
management and I’m not sure you ran
fault him so
management and I’m not sure you can
fault him so far in the leadership
he has shown over this. If I were
james Cleverty
James Cleverly I would be a bit
james Cleverty I would be a bit
nervous
James Cleverly I would be a bit
nervous because he is looking a bit
like the young Tony Blair taking on
his militant wing and showing the
country that his party has changed
and is ready for election. What has
and is ready for election. what has
happened in
and is ready for election. What has
happened in the Corbyn era was a
calamity, but it seems like Keir
Starmer realises that Andy is doing
as much as you could reasonably
expect him to do to move on. The
EHRC published a report which, by
all means, is a challenging one. And
all means, is a challanging one. And
what
all means, is a challenging one. And
what we have reduced it to since it
has been published has become
something between the leader and the
ex leader. It has become
exceptionally personalised, and I’m
terribly disappointed about that. I
feel personally that we all bear the
shame of what this report is
emphasising. We all bear the shame
of it. Discrimination of any kind,
whether it is anti—Semitic, in
whether it is anti-Semitic, in
relation
whether it is anti—Semitic, in
relation to black people, whether
relation to black peopla, whether
it’s in
relation to black people, whether
it’s in relation to gay people, is
unacceptable in our society. And why
we are staying with this being
personalised, should he be in and
out of the party, is Keir Starmer
the big guy doing the right thing,
we are missing the point. Please,
let’s get back to what the
recommendations are and implement
the recommendations. I want my
children to grow up in a society
where we do not label people,
discriminate against them, kneel on
them, rast
them, cast them away. So please,
them, fast them away. So please,
let’s stop
them, cast them away. So please,
let’s stop talking about
let’s stop talking aboutJeremy and
let’s stop talking about jeremy and
Keir
let’s stop talking aboutJeremy and
Keir Starmer. Let’s start to
implement the recommendations.
Please. I
Please. Ifeel
implement the recommendations.
Please. Ifeelslightly
Please. I feel slightly trepidation
giving what you have said of
repeating the question to Ian, but I
must give you the chance to answer
it, which was, in fairness, has
trust been restored in the Labour
trust been restored in the labour
Party by Keir
trust been restored in the Labour
Party by Keir Starmer or has it been
undermined in the reaction to
undermined in the reaction toJeremy
undermined in the reaction to jeremy
Corbyn? It is a
undermined in the reaction toJeremy
Corbyn? It is a tragedy what has
taken place and I
taken place and Ifeel for Emily
Corbyn? It is a tragedy what has
taken place and I feel for Emily and
I commend her
I commend herfor the things
taken place and I feel for Emily and
I commend her for the things she
said, actually. But you raise an
important issue, and I grieve,
generally grieve for what has
happened in public discourse in the
course of the last few years. There
is a rancour and bitterness that has
crept in and we are all individually
and collectively responsible for
and collactively responsible for
that.
and collectively responsible for
that. And to see the anti—Semitism,
that. And to see the anti-Semitism,
and we
that. And to see the anti—Semitism,
and we have all met
and we have all metJewish
organisations, members of the
organisations, members of theJewish
organisations, members of the jewish
community
organisations, members of theJewish
community over the course of the
last few years, and there is a real
fear, real
fear, realfear
last few years, and there is a real
fear, realfearthat
fear, real fear that they have, and
fear, realfear that they have, and
that is
fear, real fear that they have, and
that is something we are all
responsible for and we all have to
accept responsibility for and it is
a crying shame what has happened to
the Labour Party. I observed Jeremy
the labour Party. I observed jeremy
at close
the Labour Party. I observed Jeremy
at close quarters over the course of
the last few years and I don’t know
why he didn’t have the ability to
deal with this as he should have
done but I will say as an individual
and human being, he is not a bad
and human being, he is nota bad
man. And I
and human being, he is not a bad
man. And I think it’s important to
state that. But he has to accept his
responsibilities of not having dealt
with this and to have the generosity
of spirit to recognise that he has
to make that full apology today. But
all of us, each and every one of us,
has got to make sure that those from
the jewish
theJewish community
has got to make sure that those from
the Jewish community and
theJewish community and the Muslim
the jewish community and the Muslim
community,
theJewish community and the Muslim
community, and the wider sense of
community ran
community can live here in peace and
community ran live here in peace and
solidarity with
community can live here in peace and
solidarity with all of us and I will
tell you, there’s an awful lot of
work we have to do to make sure we
drive out hate crime in all of its
“75
ways throughout all parts of these
islands. We got about five minutes
left and I’m going to squeeze in...
Really brieﬂy.
Really briefly. Just to answer,
Really brieﬂy. just to answer,
there
Really briefly. Just to answer,
there is some positivity in this
which is there is an opportunity for
the Labour Party to change its
the labour Party to change its
disciplinary
the Labour Party to change its
disciplinary process and not let
politicians be involved and for us
to set up something that could be an
example of good practice, but
frankly, the other political parties
could learn from this and maybe all
of us could develop and make sure
that when we say zero tolerance, we
mean zero tolerance and we can sort
mean zero tolarance and we ran sort
it out
mean zero tolerance and we ran sort
it out property
mean zero tolerance and we can sort
it out properly amongst ourselves.
it out property amongst ourselves.
Let’s squeeze
it out properly amongst ourselves.
Let’s squeeze in one last question
as we have five minutes to go, from
Caroline.
Do you think it is morally
justifiable to produce a drama
which is partially based on truth
and real life events
when the subjects are unable
to defend themselves about any
misrepresentations?
What are you referring to? Are you
what are you referring to? Are you
referring to the
What are you referring to? Are you
referring to the The Crown about the
Royal family? I
Royalfamily? I am
referring to the The Crown about the
Royalfamily? lam indeed. You are.
Royal family? lam indeed. You are.
Yes, Fraser.
Royalfamily? lam indeed. You are.
Yes, Fraser. Have you been watching
it? Been going for several series
now but what is your view on what
Caroline asked? I am midway through
the fourth series and you see what
has happened this time in that they
are ﬂipping
are flipping the characters as they
are ﬂipping the characters as they
started
are flipping the characters as they
started off being sympathetic and
you like them all in the first three
series and now they all seem mean,
snobbish, hard—hearted, but
snobbish, hard—hearted, butl
series and now they all seem mean,
snobbish, hard—hearted, but I have
snobbish, hard-hearted, butl have
to say you are
snobbish, hard—hearted, but I have
to say you are just watching some
telly because it is beautifully
telly because it is beautifuuy
shot,
telly because it is beautifully
shot, mesmerising, and you can’t
wait for the next episode and I
don’t really see it as a
documentary. I do feel a wee bit
sorry for the Queen being betrayed,
right now, --
right now, —— portrayed right now as
right now, -- portrayed right now as
being more
right now, —— portrayed right now as
being more hard—hearted than she is,
being more hard-hearted than she is,
but it is a story
being more hard—hearted than she is,
but it is a story that these guys
are telling. They are using some of
the most incredible raw material and
they are telling our country’s
they are telling our countrrs
story, in
they are telling our country’s
story, in many ways, and perhaps the
problem with The Crown is it is so
good and so engrossing that you
watch the first few series and it is
like you are watching history happen
in front of you and that is how
realistic they make it. So I can
realistic they make it. So I ran
see, for that
realistic they make it. So I can
see, for that reason, when they
start to input mean things in the
mouths of the royals, you almost
start to believe it actually
happened, but then again, you can
happened, but then again, you ran
switch it
happened, but then again, you can
switch it off and make a cup of tea
and remember it’s
and remember it’sjust
switch it off and make a cup of tea
and remember it’s just the telly.
That is the problem, that if you
That is the problam, that if you
want to
That is the problem, that if you
want to call it a problem, but it is
want to all it a problam, but it is
drama and
want to call it a problem, but it is
drama and there are fictitious
elements because it is a drama, and
peopla may
people may watch and think, I will
peopla may watch and think, I will
go along with
people may watch and think, I will
go along with it but some might not
recommend —— recognise the fiction
recommend -- recognise the fiction
from the
recommend —— recognise the fiction
from the fact. With my hand on my
from the fact. with my hand on my
heart I ran
from the fact. With my hand on my
heart I can tell you I’ve never seen
heart I ran tell you I’ve never seen
an episode of it,
heart I can tell you I’ve never seen
an episode of it, I’ve got the real
thing, and Her Majesty are simply
amazing. No intention of watching
it. Ian? I have to agree that it is
drama and if people enjoy watching
drama and if peopla enjoy watching
it, so be it.
drama and if people enjoy watching
it, so be it. But it is about people
it, so be it. But it is about peopla
who are
it, so be it. But it is about people
who are around now and cannot really
who are around now and rannot really
answer
who are around now and cannot really
answer back. At the end of the day
it is drama and everybody should see
it as that. Again, I have to say I
find myself agreeing with Rose. We
know the Queen and who she is. I
haven’t seen it either. I am still
catching up on the West Wing, and
catching up on the West wing, and
not got onto
catching up on the West Wing, and
not got onto the The Crown and
peopla do
people do have the ability to switch
peopla do have the ability to switch
it off on
people do have the ability to switch
it off on those making television
programmes when people are still
programmes when peopla are still
with us
programmes when people are still
with us when they have to be
respectful, but it is television and
respectful, but it is telavision and
it is
respectful, but it is television and
it is drama and should be seen for
what it is, exactly that. It is
entertainment. Do you feel like
that, james?
that, James? If it was you featuring
that, james? If it was you featuring
in a
that, James? If it was you featuring
in a drama? There was a drama made
about me, and if someone was foolish
enough to make one about me and
expect anyone to watch it, that’s a
different thing but I think Rose is
spot on and she’s in the wonderful
position where she gets the real
thing, so why make do with the
synthetic when you have the full
Monty, as it were customer you are
in a drama, James, it’s the UK
Government. Don’t give up the day
job, Ian. I have
job, Ian. I haveto
Government. Don’t give up the day
job, Ian. I have to admit that this
socialist has watched every single
one of the The Crown. Is it morally
justifiabla to
justifiable to produce the drama?
They can’t defence themselves. I
think the first three series were
much more of a comfortable watch
than the last one which was full of
anguish and the most terrible things
happen. We know, objectively
speaking, the most terrible things
have happened recently in the middle
of Charles and Diana’s marriage and
the anguish that the couple had, but
of course the problem is the poor
boys, William and Harry and this is
a drama about their parents, and
actually, we perhaps should be
thinking about that. And maybe
thinking about that. And maybe not
the, not he,
the, not be, appreciate it as a
drama, but these are real people who
drama, but these are real peopla who
are alive
drama, but these are real people who
are alive and have suffered as a
result of the break—up of their
result of the break-up of their
parents
result of the break—up of their
parents marriage being done so
publicly. But that’s not enough to
stop you watching it? But I have
watched it. So there we are. Our
hour is up and it’s not something we
often get to talk about, dramas
about the Royal family is the
questions came in about that. Our
questions fame in about that. Our
time is up and
questions came in about that. Our
time is up and tonight I’ll
questions came appropriately enough
questions fame appropriately enough
from
questions came appropriately enough
from Windsor and next week we will
be joined by an audience in
bejoined by an audience in Swansea
be joined by an audience in Swansea
and after
bejoined by an audience in Swansea
and after that, Bath, so if you want
to be part of the question Time
audience be part —— go to the
audience be part -- go to the
website
audience be part —— go to the
website and follow the instructions
website and follow the instmctions
and we
website and follow the instructions
and we would love to hear what you
have to say. Adrian Charles is
coming up on Radio five Live, and
you ran see how
you can see how to get in touch and
you ran see how to get in touch and
put your view on
you can see how to get in touch and
put your view on that programme as
well, but for now, thank you very
much to the panel for coming in.
Fraser, thank you for
Fraser, thank you forjoining us
Fraser, thank you for joining us
down the
Fraser, thank you forjoining us
down the line and to the audience in
Windsor, thank you for your
contributions and thank you at home
for watching. Goodbye.
MUSIC: Sestra
by Post War Glamour Girls
# A murder of crows
swept out of the blue
# He’s behind you now
# You cannot hear me... #
New Icelandic drama...
As we near the halfway point,
the competition is hotting up.
And because Strictly can’t make it
to Blackpool this year,
our couples will be bringing
the Blackpool spirit to the studio.
Absolutely spectacular.
Chris, I know you are a big fan
of Oprah, so I know you will have
seen her tweet today about how
she did her interview with Obama
with her in California
and him in Washington,
DC, but they used Hollywood green
screen technology to make it
look like they were in
the same living room.
In front of a fire —
looked a beautiful scene, didn’t it?
You know, we like to think we can
do a bit of television
wizardry on Newscast,
but nothing on that scale.
Well, where Oprah goes,
we like to follow,
because Chris Mason is also
in a Hollywood—style
green screen room.
Then, by the power of TV magic,
we can put him in the Oval Office
with notjust Barack Obama
but Donald Trump, too.
Hello, bros.
Would you mind getting
a social distance?
Mind you, Oprah, look at this.
We’ve got them both.
Yeah, that’s much more Newscast,
isn’t it, to have a casual chat
with a couple of people rather
thanjust a big sit—down interview
with one boring person.
Exactly.
And we can also go one better
thanJon Sopel from Americast,
who would not stop going
on about his cameo in The Crown.
We can put Chris Mason
in the real Crown.
Hello, Ma’am!
An exclusive interview.
I’ve even brought a microphone.
She’s a bit quiet, isn’t she?
So, Ma’am, let me tell
you what we’ve got on Newscast.
We are going to talk Christmas,
seeing as you’ve got the tree up.
We’ll talk about your
Home Secretary, Priti Patel,
on this edition of Newscast.
She doesn’t look very impressed.
Hopefully she will be by the end.
Newscast.
Newscast from the BBC.
Hello.
It’s Adam in the studio.
And Laura in the same
studio, two metres apart.
Just checking.
And Fergus in New
Broadcasting House.
And Chris in the socially
distanced booth of news.
Hello, everyone.
I think it’s become clear
in the last few days that,
because I am not going to be able
to have a massive, big,
normal Christmas, what I’m
going to do is smuggle a little bit
of Christmas in, starting now,
to sort of spread it out.
Because, Laura and Fergus,
it is still not clear what Christmas
is going to look like.
We are getting more and more
clues every day about how
the scientists see it,
and maybe the decisions
the politicians will
have to start making.
That’s right.
Shall we do big picture?
Yeah.
So, the government —
notjust here but Edinburgh,